Exploratory data analysis is a
critical step in the data
science process aimed at
understanding the main
characteristics of a data set
through visualizations and
statistics.
In this video, we will
illustrate how to perform
exploratory data analysis using
Python libraries to visualize
and understand the data stored
in CrateDB.
Exploratory data analysis is an
approach to analyze data sets
with various statistical methods
and visualizations.
This isn't just about making
calculations or plotting charts,
it's a thorough process of
getting to know the data.
We look for patterns and trends
that give us insights into how
our variables relate to each
other, and we seek to understand
the underlying structure of the
data set.
It's also crucial that we
identify any deviations from
expected trends, which could be
anomalies or outliers that might
indicate errors or unique
significant occurrences that
warrant further investigation.
Alongside numerical analysis,
visualization is a powerful tool
in EDA.
Through charts, graphs, and
plots, we make complex data more
accessible and understandable.
In this notebook, we explore
weather data using the PyCaret
library, an open source machine
learning library in Python that
significantly reduces the time
from hypothesis to insights.
PyCaret stands out with its low
code approach, providing an
efficient end to end machine
learning pipeline that's easy
for beginners and robust enough
for expert users.
PyCaret coupled with CrateDB
is a powerful duo for handling
large scale data analytics and
ML projects.
CrateDB excels in real time
handling of massive amounts of
data, while PyCaret applies
its machine learning algorithms
directly to this data for an
array of analytics tasks.
The journey through this
notebook will take us through
data extraction from CrateDB,
preprocessing with PyCaret,
and visualization to understand
data distributions and
relationships.
We start by setting up our
environment, connecting to CrateDB
and preparing our data for
analysis.
All necessary dependencies are
located in the requirements text
file and they can be installed
by running pip install command.
If you are running this notebook
in an environment like Google
Collab, use the absolute path as
illustrated here.
As a first step, we are looking
into connecting to a CrateDB
instance using SQL Alchemy, a
popular SQL toolkit and object
relational mapping library for
Python.
Firstly, we establish a
connection string and we can
have two scenarios, one for
connecting to a local CrateDB
instance, which is often used
for development and testing
purposes, and another for
connecting to a CrateDB cloud
instance, which is typically
utilized for production
databases hosted in the cloud.
Once the connection string is
defined, we create an engine
object in SQLAlchemy.
It's a common interface to the
database that we are querying
from.
The following code demonstrates
fetching data from the CrateDB
instance and loading it into a
pandas data frame.
We execute a simple SQL query
to select all records from
weather data.
After successfully fetching the
data, we use df.head(5) to
preview the first 5 rows of our
data frame in our data set.
The timestamp column is crucial
as it holds the key to time
based analysis.
It is stored as a big integer
value that isn't automatically
recognized as date time by
pandas.
We use the to_date time function
from pandas which converts the
timestamp column into datetime
object which pandas and Python
can understand and manipulate as
time based data.
Once the conversion is complete,
we take this time stamp column
and set it as the index of our
data frame as it unlocks the
potential to resample the data
based on periods, compute,
rolling statistics and much
more.
It's an essential step in
preparing our data for time
series forecasting or any kind
of temporal analysis.
In time series data sets like
weather records, it's common to
encounter missing values.
Here we implement time weighted
interpolation to estimate
missing values in our
temperature, humidity, and wind
speed columns.
Interpolation is a statistical
method used to estimate unknown
values that fall within the
range of a set of known values.
By specifying the method as
time, we instruct pandas to
consider the time dimension.
This means that the estimated
values for missing data points
will be calculated with the
linear time difference between
the known points using the date
time index as a reference.
Before setting up the
environment for the analysis, we
do the final preprocessing step.
This piece of code extracts the
data for a specific city, Berlin
in our case, calculates daily
averages and organizes the data
frame with a timestamp index for
further analysis or
visualization.
Now we initialize our
forecasting environment using
PyCaret.
We start by defining the
forecast horizon which is set to
10.
This parameter is crucial as it
tells our model how far into the
future we want to predict, in
this case 10 days.
Next, we specify fold as 3
which indicates that we will be
using a 3-fold cross
validation process.
TSForecastingExperiment object
serves as a primary tool for
time series analysis.
To the setup method, we also
pass the target variable, which
is temperature and a list of
seasonal periods to consider.
The seasonal periods parameter
is a list containing 1, 5 and 20,
which are the cycle lengths we
hypothesize might be inherent in
the temperature data.
After running this code, we can
observe a table with a summary
of the settings and many
findings from the time series
forecasting setup.
We won't go into details here,
but it is worth mentioning that
the model reports possible
seasonality for five and 20
days options
By calling plot Model function,
we are instructing PyCaret to
plot the original data.
It's an interactive plot
allowing us to select a
particular area on the graph and
expand further at a more
granular level than what we can
initially see in the plot.
PyCaret comes with a variety of
tools and visualization options.
The next snippet tells us how to
generate the autocorrelation
function plot.
It is a tool used to visualize
how the data points in a time
series are related to each
other.
For our example, the graph
indicates that there is a
stronger correlation between
recent weather temperatures and
today's temperature compared to
temperatures measured further in
the past.
Finally, PyCaret offers an
easy way to plot all these
graphs in a single multi plot by
using the diagnostics plot.
The diagnostics also include
periodogram, histogram, QQ plot,
and partial autocorrelation
function plots.
From these plots, we can further
learn the distribution of our
data frequencies and
correlations.
With this overview, you are
equipped to perform your EDA on
time series data, leverage the
integrations between PyCaret
and CrateDB, and be on your way
to drawing insightful forecasts
from your datasets.